## Database and Instance

An oracle database consists of a **database** and at least one database **instance** (commonly referred to as simply an **instance**).

	1. Database
	A database is a set of files, located on disk, that store data. These files can exist independently of a database instatnce.

`	2. Database instance
	An instance is a set of memory structures that manage database files. The instance consists of a shared memory area, called **system global area (SGA)**, and a set of **background processess**. An instacne can exist independendenlty of database files.

	
The database has **physical structures** and **logical structures**.

## Database storage structure

### Physical storage sctructure


	When we execute `CREATE DATABASE` command, the following files are created:

	1. Data files
		Every Oracle database has one or more physical **data files**, which contain all the datatbase data. The data of logical database structures, such as tables and indexes, is physically stored in the data files.	
	2. Control files
		Every Oracle databasee has a **control file**. A control file contains metadata specifying the physical structure of the database, including the database name and the names and location of the databased files.
	3. Online redo log files	
		Every Oracle Database has an **online redo log*, which is a set of two or more **online redo log files**. An online **redo log** is made up of redo entries (also called **redo records**), which record all changes made to data.


	### Logical Storage Structures

	1. Data blocks
		At he finest level of granularity, Oracle Database data is stored in data blocks. One **data block** corresponds to a specific number of bytes on disk.

	2. Extents 
		An **extent** is a specific number of logically contiguous data blocks, obtained in a single allocation, used to store a specific type of information.

	3. Segments 
		A **segment** is a set of extents allocated for a user object (for example, a table or index), **undo data** or temporary data.

	4. Tablespaces
		A database is divided into logical storage units called **tablespaces**. A tablespace is the logical container for a segment. Each tablespace contains at least one data file.


## Database instance structure

### Oracle Database Processes

	Types of processes:

	1. Client processes
		These processes are created and maintained to run the software code of an apllication program or an Oracle tool. Most environment have separate computers for client processes.

	2. Background processes
		These processes consolidate functions that would otherwise be handled by multiple Orale Datatabase programs running for each cliet process. Background processes asynchronously perform I/O and monitor other Oracle Database processes to provide increased parallelism for better performance end reliability.

	3. Server processes
		These processes communicate with client processes and interact with Oracle Database to fulfill requests.

### Instance memory structure

	1. System Global Area (SGA)
	The SGA is a group of shared memory structures that contain data and control information for one database instance. Examples of SGA components include cached data blocks and shared SQL areas.

	2. Program Global Areas (PGA)		
	A PGA is a memory region that contain data and control information for a server background process. Access to the PGA is exclusive to the process. Each server process and background process has its own PGA.


## Application and Networking Architecture

### Application Architecture

The **application architecture** refers to the computing environment in which a database application connects to an Oracle database. The two most common database architectures are *client/server* and *multitier*.

In a **client/server architecture**, the client application initiates a request for an operation to be performed on the database server. The server runs Oracle Database software and handles the functions required for concurrent, shared data access. The server receives and processes requests that originate from clients.

In a traditional **multitier architecture**, one or more application servers perform parts of the operation. An **application server** contains a large part o the application logic, provides access to the data for the client, and performs some query processing, thus lessening the load on the database. The application server can server as an interface between clients and multiple databases and provide an addtitional level of security.

**Service-oriented architecture (SOA)** is a multitier architecture in which application functionality is encapsulated in **services**. SOA services are usually implemented as Web services. Web services are accessile through HTTP and are based on XML-based standarts such as Web Services Descroptions Language (WSDL) and SOAP.

Oracle Database can act as a Web service provider in a traditional multitier or SOA environment.

## Network Architecture

**Oracle Net Services** is the interface between the database and the network communication protocols that faciliate **distributed processing** and distributed databases. Communication protocols define the way that data is transmitted and received on a network. Oracle Net Services supports communications on all major network protocols, including TCP/IP, HTTP, FTP, and WebDAV. 

**Oracle Net**, a component of Oracle Net Services, establishes and maintains a network session from a client application to a database server. After a network session is established, Oracle Net acts as the data courier for both the client application and the database server, exchanging messages between then. Oracle Net can perform these jobs because it is located on ech computer in the network.

An important component of Net Services is the **Oracle Net Listener** (called **listener**), which is a separate process that runs on the database server or elsewhere in the network. Client applications can send connections requests to the listener, which manages the traffic of these requests to the database server. When a connections is established, the client and database communicate directly.

The most common ways to configure an Oracle database to service client requests are:

	* Dedicated server architecture
	Each client process connects to a dedicated server process. The server process is not shared by any other client for the duration of the client's session. Each new session is assigned a dedicated server process. 

	* Shared server architecture
	The database uses a pool of shared processes for multiple sessions. A client process communicated with **dispatcher**, which is a process that enables many lcients to connect to the same databse instance without the need for a dedicated server process for each client.
